Would you like to see how some of your brothers and sisters are displaying that kind of endurance?
We'd like to introduce you to brother Vasili Kalin who was baptized for more than 50 years and
Serves together with his wife Maria at the Russia branch
Has their load been easy to carry?
This is their story
I was born in Ukraine to a family of Jehovah's Witnesses. When I was five, our whole family was exiled to Siberia
Traveling in the same train was a little girl who 17 years later would become my wife. That was Maria
We were married in
Under the Soviet Union there was a ban on importing our publications
The congregations needed more literature, and we wanted to help the brothers
So Maria and I decided that we would start printing the publications ourselves
I knew it would be risky because we had two young children our son was done only five years old and our daughter was less than a year old
We risked losing our freedom and even our children
But we trusted in Jehovah to support us and we didn't think too hard about what could happen if we have done that
We would just have given up
My biggest problem was that I had no experience with photo development whatsoever
So what did I do? I bought a reference book and some equipment
The circuit of this year gave me the microfilm that was used for duplicating the literature
Then one evening we tried printing the literature for the first time
Of course, it was a complete mess
But in a little while we were able to start producing publications that were of good quality and readable
Our work was highly confidential and we had to keep it a secret even from our family
who were all witnesses
Our work was done at night we closed our curtains and turn off the lights
We had a red lamp that gave us light while we were working
When the literature was ready, we would deliver it in the morning to all the congregations
It was also difficult and dangerous because if they caught us with literature, there was no doubt we would be sent to prison
We needed to travel dozens of kilometers. I am very grateful to Maria that she often helped me
A brother would drive up in his car and I would pass on the literature to him
One time the brother was late in Siberia it gets very cold
And I remember that it was snowing so heavily that I turned into a snow woman you could say
I couldn't go into a store to her mom because the brother could come any minute and we would miss each other
So I had to wait
Well, of course, then Maria when I would come back from work and Maria wasn't home
I would get very worried
Anything could have happened. Maybe she had been arrested
Sometimes our children knew that mama was a way delivering literature and they also got worried
Unfortunately, everything I have gone through has taught me never to rely on myself
But instead to completely trust in Jehovah
We got a lot of joy out of the years we spent producing literature
We knew that our brothers and sisters were being fed spiritually
We are grateful to Jehovah that for 17 years we were able to print the publications
1991 was a landmark year for Jehovah's Witnesses in the Soviet Union
We received official recognition what a victory that was
Unfortunately the situation with Jehovah's Witnesses today reminds me of the time we lived through
I see that Satan's methods have not changed
But it is really encouraging to remember that Jehovah also has not changed
He defended and protected his people in the past and he will do the same today